Title: Evolution and Mind
Date: 2014-05-13 00:49
Author: tushartyagi
Category: Lessons
Slug: evolution-and-mind

Tens of million years ago, a seed was planted on the face of the earth
and over all the time that seed gave birth to what we are today: humans.
It took so much time for humans to evolve from our fickle minded ape
ancestors, but the evolution hasn't stopped and the human being still
evolves over his lifetime.

Man is made to evolve, every aspect of his, mental, physical, spiritual
is meant to change over time. The time works on a smaller scale, like
decades when man changes the phases of his life, evolving from a child
to a teenager, or from teenager to being an adult. All this time, his
physical body goes through a metamorphosis, so does his mind. Millennia
of evolution made man what he is today, decades of evolution makes a man
what he is when he dies. And just like nature acted like a filter,
selectively removing part which were not needed for evolution or
survival, nature gave man a part of evolution, the mind to filter out
ideas which he doesn't need. And by using this machinery, the human
mind, one can transcend to a whole new level. What one becomes is the
sum total of ideas one has collected over the course of life. Evolution
didn't end when a human specimen was made by nature, or when human
developed supreme intellect, it is still going on and will keep going
on. The trick is to use it to our advantage.
