Title: Rationality and Reality
Date: 2014-07-14 16:52
Author: Tushar Tyagi 
Category: Life-Lesson
Slug: rationality-and-reality

The thoughts that we have can be divided into two schools. I have what
I'd call real thoughts and rational thoughts. Both of them are obviously
real, but rationality has more touch to life and has its practicality:
it contains the thoughts which directly affect the life I'm living.
Reality on the other hand has thoughts which are always present behind
the scenes, such thoughts are naked, hide nothing and while they
continue to exist they don't really come into view frequently.

In order to define the difference, let me take a clich√©d example, one
where a person finds that he has terminal illness and will die in few
months. The difference that comes to the mind when we think about the
way he lives his life before and after finding about the illness is the
difference between what I call the rational and real thoughts. Usually,
severing his connections with his job is the first thing that person
does (maybe punch his boss on his way out, kiss the lovely secretary
etc..), then he comes to realise that what an asshole he has been all
these years: running after money and fame and not doing what he loved
all his life, he tries now to devote time to his family, love his kids
more, maybe pick up a hobby that he left many years ago; his career,
something that was the most important part of his life, now takes a back
seat. We have seen and heard about this happening to a lot of people,
people who had their priorities changed after finding out that they have
a limited time here.

Wasn't such a person's loved ones there before he got sick? Weren't his
interests present in his heart before he came to realise about his
mortality? They were and they were. But before coming in terms with
life, before coming to realise that life is sometimes as fragile as the
house of cards, he was thinking in rational terms. And now coming face
to face with reality of life, he's in a totally different ballgame.

It would appear that I suggest it's wrong to be rational; it's
absolutely not. The idea is to be rational all the while being in touch
with the reality of life as well. The reality of life isn't about
mortality, it isn't only about the fact that most of the people will and
do die without making mark in the sands of time, it's about living life
all the while being in touch with these facts.

Rationality is needed. It's the rational thoughts that we have about so
many things that give us the money to buy food and clothes for our
bodies, a house to live in and to live an overall comfortable life. But
till what limit does one has to go for this comfort, till when should a
person run after things he doesn't require? For this calculation, one
needs to be thinking in terms of reality. Where will the money go once
he's dead? It's of no use to him then. But before he dies, he requires,
with all his heart, the love of his family and friends, and in this
situation he's asking for some more time to be added to his life.

I think one way of having a balance between the rationality and reality
is to find a difference between the needs and the wants, and once that
is done, it's all about sticking with the former most of the time. I say
find because different people have different needs and one man's need is
another man's want (and vice versa). While someone might want a
superbike, he might need only a vehicle to get from one point to
another. While
[someone](%20http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_Shadyac "Tom Shadyac")might
want a 1,600 m^2^ room house, what he might need is a trailer home. It's
finally comes down to [simplifying the
life](http://tushartyagi.com/what-if-it-is/ "What if it is?").

And once a person starts simplifying life, not only does he have more
time to go after things which really matter on [the time scale of
life](http://tushartyagi.com/time-scales-of-life/ "Time Scales of Life"),
he also has the boon of being away from things which come at the cost of
what matters most.
