Title: The Cost of Independence
Date: 2014-06-14 04:04
Author: tushartyagi
Category: Life-Lesson
Slug: the-cost-of-independence

Every person likes the other person to be like him, it's unconscious.
When somebody is telling me as to why his football team is better than
other teams, he's essentially asking me to look at the way he sees one
part of his life and agree with him that his point of view is right. If
I tell him that his team is a big piece of shit, then I'll be struck
with great vengeance and furious anger.

Give this theory a romantic angle, if someone who likes me is agreeing
to come to me and do something she usually doesn't do, then she is
trying to be like me, because I'd start liking a person more if she has
something in common. This usually is involuntary, though one can reap
the benefits if required.

And so on and so forth.

Every one person wants the other person to be like him, that doesn't
really matter unless one person's thoughts start interfering and
overriding other people's thoughts. Then we have a problem and the world
is in danger, that is what happened in WW2, and that is what happens in
today's time when a leader asks his followers to do something evil. But
look around, even at a personal level, everyone will tell you what you
have to do directly or indirectly.

That becomes the sole reason why you will shatter hearts when you try to
be independent, thinking for yourself.

So let me digress and take an example of how the life of a typical
person, who lives to be 80, is meshed and entangled with so many other
people's lives. Dividing his time in years, I get:

0-10: Under the supervision of parents.

10-20: Teenage. Hates parents due to hormones, under the supervision of
friends.

20-30: Parents are OKayish. Colleagues, friends still matter a lot.

30-40: Spouse is the king/queen. Parents are good. Kids drive them nuts.

40-50: Another decades with teenage kids (which are stupid and
self-centered) and spouse. Parents and community club people are
lost-friends-who-came-back-in-life.

50-60: Parents are possibly dead, kids have moved out. Friends are those
who share the same political, national and cultural beliefs.

60-70: You had too much sugar and a sedentary lifestyle and probably
died of cancer. If not then your kids and spouse love you (trust me, it
is possible) and you still have those old-farts from your community.

70-80: Some bad years in bed and you die.

Observe how social a normal person is. In almost every decade he'll have
a circle of other people whom he trusts/loves/admires and a great chunk
of his life depends on them.

Let’s get back to the discussion. Think about an occasion when a person
you were really fond of didn't have the same way of thinking about an
important-to-you idea. Ouch, you felt a pang of awkwardness and started
putting your point across more clearly. Finally a debate ensued, and
none of the parties won. The feeling after that debate is what I call
“breaking of the heart”. But that’s completely normal, that's how we
sell ourselves and that's how we roll.

If you try to be independent, you will break a few hearts every decades.
You will have to say no to those people whom you really like and they
like you back. You will have to look at their sad, stupid faces because
that one time their thoughts and your thoughts won't have the same
wavelength and none of you is going to accept the ideas. And that is
when you'll feel you’ve done the inevitable. You have broken the hearts,
said no to the ideas which are important to your parents, your friends,
your SO, your colleagues. Because let’s face it, the moment you'll have
sense of what kind of people you're sitting with, you'll have a thought
crossing your mind that maybe you are not like these people, maybe you
don't really flow with their ideas. Be it your religious beliefs, your
cultural beliefs, your political beliefs, if you've thought about it
yourself, with neutral mind, there are chances that you'll find
differences from the people you've been hanging out with. And then
someday you decide to break the chord and make them furious. But all the
while before that, you had some very weird feelings, feeling of being
ostracised, the feeling that you'll be all alone in this world if you
don't tag along with these people, but that's just one of the irrational
fears from the times society was just you and 50 other people. The truth
is, there will always be like-minded people who'll welcome you with open
arms and who try to dictate your life a lot less that "those" people.

Life is an experiment, you only live once, it's okay to make mistakes
and break hearts, people who really love you will stick around no matter
what. But if these mistakes aren't made because you want to make someone
else happy instead of living your life, then your life becomes one big
mistake and then you have to bear the consequences every few years.

Either treat life as an experiment, or live it like a mistake. Either be
independent, or be a foot mat for other people. The cost of independence
is breaking hearts, and it needs to be paid in full.

 
