Title: The Social Animal, Not!
Date: 2014-05-30 15:11
Author: Tushar Tyagi
Category: Rant
Slug: the-social-animal-not

Ahhh, Man the social animal. I sometimes wonder what would have happened
if we were not social like we are, but were un-social, individual
reptiles like snake. We’d been either wiped out off the face of the
planet or would have remained totally unevolved, to the point that I
would not have been sitting here writing about my fellow men.

While this social connection has led us to where we are today, and we
absolutely love being social, in company of other beings, it has also
hardwired our brain to feel uncomfortable, uneasy and sometimes jealous
of a person who doesn’t behave in the way social rules work. Add the
fact that internet has made the world so small from what it used to be,
we are constantly in touch with such individuals. And what do we do? We
hate them for being too individualistic.

We love drama, we love to see other people suffer, we love pointing out
other person’s mistakes and we don’t like, most of the time, when the
other person succeeds. We totally ignore the fact that almost every one
of us has the ability to do what the other person has done but probably
we are too smart for that, we are too smart to indulge in practicing the
tools of our trade, most of us are too smart to try something new, too
smart to break our social barrier and move out of our comfort zone, too
damn ignorant to tell other person, who is doing one thing better than
us, that he isn’t doing some other thing right; we are too busy asking
fishes to climb
trees^[[1]](http://quoteinvestigator.com/2013/04/06/fish-climb/ "Everybody is a Genius. But If You Judge a Fish by Its Ability to Climb a Tree, It Will Live Its Whole Life Believing that It is Stupid.")^.

And yet, time after time we come across people who make some change in
the world, through their sheer persistence and hard work, we come across
people who leave the comforts of the world to take up the challenges
which the world throw at their faces and instead of taking inspiration
from these people we like to blame them for not doing enough in some
other field. We fail to recognize that they are making the world a
little bit better but focus on the fact that what they are doing is too
little to change the world in any comparable manner.

Our cousins apes don’t have such complex system for living, they have a
group of around 150 and they are intelligent enough to break it into
subgroups if the number becomes too large. They somehow know,
instinctively, that too many cooks will spoil the broth, which is
something we people fail to learn from our primitive brethren. We like
to be connected to almost no one socially and thousands of people
virtually, and then act as if the social environment is the place to be,
like we are designed to not breath air but the bits and bytes of social
network, and when people are not connected socially in any way, they
become more stupid and generally ignorant of people around them.

Human face is a treasure trove of emotions, the cheeks, the forehead,
the eyes show the emotions as they really are. Tell someone you love her
and she’ll look into your eyes the moments she can move past the
overwhelming emotion your words elicit, meet someone you love and you
can see the twinkle in her eyes, the unfakable smile tells you how
genuinely interested a person is in you, all of this is absent from the
virtual media which has suddenly become the preferred way people
connect. And since the other person isn’t looking at your face,
shouting, bitching, and being vitriolic becomes a lot easier. You can’t
or won’t tell a person on her face that she’s ugly, but commenting that
over her latest photo is easy because you won’t be there to see the look
on her face.

I have come across people who have realized that the social media is
something less-than-complimentary to one’s real life, and these people
are always very interesting and entertaining. And then there are others
who just live to update their pages with the latest and the greatest
things that are happening to them, manufacturing their profiles one
picture at a time. (There are some people hanging in the middle, tilting
themselves in either group, but they are out of the scope of this
article).

While this article has been good enough to show my disliking towards the
social media, I still would like to give a TL;DR treatment which is that
we are social animals, we absolutely love other people and looking at
their frozen faces through a computer screen tend to fuck us up. Given a
choice (and one always has this choice), one should prefer social life
over social media. Will someone play with me?!

 
