Title: Us
Date: 04-11-2014
Modified:
Status: hidden
Category: Philosophy
Tags: Life
Slug: us
Author: Tushar

Try this. Take some time out from the busy life, the one which you live
everyday, and have been living everyday since you started living and get to a
place which has vast open space. Something like a jungle, a hotel, a lake, and
some place which is devoid of other human being. And just look. What do you
see?

I recently was left alone in such a place, where there was no one else and all I
could see all around me was nothingness; just a vast open plain land. And I was
lost for a few minutes, it's a lot like the realisation he had when he came up
with the headless theory. Maybe not that potent, and maybe it's not an original
idea now, but I could see the grandness of the universe. The grandness, not as
in "grand scheme of things" but in size, in whose comparision I felt so little.
I was just a fraction of the size of this planet, and this planet is infinitely
small when seen on the scale of the universe. 

There are times when I think like this, when I see the vastness of space around
me, when I just go and stand and look at a place where there are no people, or a
place which is packed full of people who are busy with their work and their
life. It is at those moments when the ego that I have, the importance that I
give to my life, and the consideration that I am an important being on this
planet, maybe in the universe and I sense that how falliable is this statement.
So untrue.

Everyone has a story to tell others; story about their life, the importance they
hold in some other people's lives and while they don't talk about it often, and
sometimes not at all, it's always inside of them. This fallacy of holding
yourself important is present in everyone. Sure you are important to a few
people, but to the whole world? Sorry. Everyone moves on after some time, and
while there may be some void left in some hearts by your departure, the truth is 
that it usually isn't so big that it can't be closed by time.

Coming back to my observation, at that time when these thoughts to unimportance
of life were going around in my head, I also realised that the vision that I had
was, in a way, wider that usual. As if my peripheral vision was upgraded to some
newer version, a better one. I felt like, for lack a better expression (taken
shamelessly from Billy Pilgrim), I was stuck in time; everything around me was
going on just fine but only my life stopped, and I could see and observer other
people around me. And their lives? Well, they simply were going around without
giving this guy another thought. Just like I said.


