Title: What if it is?
Date: 2014-04-13 14:33
Author: Tushar Tyagi
Category: Life-Lesson
Slug: what-if-it-is

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q0EcNdM79sA

The video posted above is what I found to be one of the best episodes of
[Six Feet Under](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0248654/) and one of the
best conversations in the series. David, the guy on the left had been
robbed, drugged, beaten up, made to lie with a dead body, almost
immolated and had a gun put in his mouth a few episodes ago, which is
rightly calls the "worst fucking experience" of his life. Nathaniel, his
dead father, who visits the family members when they're confused, is
proud of him because he got over his fear of coming face to face with
his perpetrator.

"What if it is? What if life really is so simple, that I can take it as
it comes, without trying to find any meaning?" This thought has echoed
in my mind a lot of times after I heard it. I had the habit of finding
meaning in everything, every relationship, every incident, every
conversation and in the process, ironically, I almost always got lost
while searching for this hidden meaning and intellectualizing the
situation in general.

Since the last one year, I’ve had a different approach of handling
situations which go out of my hand, and this also includes the life in
general which seems to be almost never in my control: I don’t try to
find meaning of the situation. Instead, I now try to take the life as it
comes. To do that, I regularly ask myself, is the situation really that
bad or am I simply making it so by thinking too much about it? Is it
really that complex or am I making it more complicated by coming up with
all the possible scenarios and outcomes? In simple words, is it me who’s
trying to find a meaning in the situation, or unnecessarily adding
meaning if it lacks one?

As it turns out, most of the time I’m freaking out and complicating the
situation. And it’s not until much later that I realise this.

“Some things are in our control and others are not.” Epictetus started
his [Manual](http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html) with this
statement. And I’ve found it to be one of the best food-for-thoughts
I’ve had. This desire to control the things which are not under our
control is what complicates the situation. And mostly it is the desire
to control other people’s thought, the desire to have in my possession
something which isn’t mine, or to have an alternate closure to a past
situation. This desire is the starting point where the mind starts
scheming how can I control other person's thoughts, or how can I get in
the possession of something which I want so badly, or to have a right
and happy ending to a situation which I screwed up? Once this scheme is
finalised in the fantasy world, the mind next starts scheming about how
the life is going to be much better when I finally have the person, the
thing or life under my spell. And this is a vicious cycle, where every
time I have the situation figured out, I have a deeper desire to control
it and make it more glossy and perfect. In simple terms, it's me who's
making a simple life complicated.

This sounds bad enough, and from conversations that I have with other
people and with myself, it became clear that the desire to control
something which is outside one's control is present in everyone.
Everyone wants to be rich and famous, to be blessed with Fortuna and
Pheme, and to control what is not in their control: life, death, other
people's thoughts to name a few.

I’m no expert in decoding the meaning of life, and in the worst case
scenario, I hope, there isn’t any meaning to life, to the suffering, the
joy and everyday incidents which I don't even remember. I have found
that life doesn’t have to be extraordinarily complex and confusing. It
is what it is. While the father in the above video doesn’t want any
phony existential bullshit, there is always a point sticking out: that
there is no point. Not David's version about his helplessness but
Nathaniel's version that there's no point in complicating the situation.
You have a life, realise the temporary setback and move on.

Nowadays I mostly take the life as it comes, one step at a time, keeping
most of the situations which confuse me and complicate the life, at bay.
Not every situation has to be meaningful, not every situation has to be
intellectual; there are some things which simply are, and the
realization that I have no control over them is relaxing. And while
giving everything I have to situations I can control is needed, the best
decision in other situations is to move on because then the life becomes
simple enough.
